---
layout: post
shortnews: false
onlyarchive: false
---

Now that I have some time to breathe in the semester, I thought I
would talk about the 26th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles
(SOSP 2017). I attended SOSP 2017 in Shanghai, China where my student
[Pandian Raju](https://www.linkedin.com/in/pandianraju/) presented our
work on [PebblesDB](https://github.com/utsaslab/pebblesdb). Two other
UT professors, [Emmett Witchel](https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~witchel/)
and [Simon Peter](https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~simon/), also attended
SOSP along with their student, [Youngjin
Kwon](https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~yjkwon/), who presented
[Strata](http://cs.utexas.edu/~yjkwon/pdfs/sosp17-strata.pdf). The UT
Systems group has had at least one paper in SOSP/OSDI every year since
2005!

<center>    
<img src="/img/shanghai-view.jpg" width="500" text-align="center" padding="10" >
<br><i>The view from my hotel room</i>
<br><br>
</center>
    
The conference was held in the beautiful [Pudong
Shangri-La](http://www.shangri-la.com/shanghai/pudongshangrila/) hotel
in Shanghai. Right off the bat, I want to thank the volunteers of
[Shanghai Jiao Tong University](http://en.sjtu.edu.cn) (about 30 of
them!) for their amazing hospitality. Here's some of the great things
they did:

1. Received conference participants at the Pudong Airport, gave them a
metro-card with 100 RMB, and directed them to where they could catch
the train.

2. Took us sight-seeing to the Shanghai Tower. Another group went on a
river cruise.

3. Had people posted at different locations in the enormous Shangri-La
hotel to direct people to the right conference rooms.

Overall, the hospitality was amazing, and the conference participants
were made to feel comfortable. Kudos to the amazing volunteer team!
    
### The AI Systems Workshop

I went to Shanghai a day earlier to catch the AI Systems workshop. It
did not disappoint! The event was standing room only, and whenever the
speakers said something, a dozen cameras would go up and flash,
leaving me wondering whether I was at an academic conference or a
fashion show.

The craze in AI is just insane, and a lot of it is just re-branding
whatever you are currently doing as ML or AI. However, the workshop
also pointed out that behind the empty marketing buzz words there
*are* some good systems problems that are worth attacking. Here is one
thing I found insightful (as someone not part of the AI scene): to
improve performance, you need to batch your computations; however,
while improving performance, batching **decreases** accuracy. So it is
not as simple as lets batch and throw more compute at it! I wonder
which other tried-and-tested systems techniques to improve performance
fail when applied to AI Systems.

There was a panel where they discussed what current researchers are
doing wrong. The panelists mentioned that everything they do is in
search of that elusive +1% or 0.5% in accuracy: systems that sacrifice
this to increase performance are a total no-go. Similarly, AI-Systems
research seems to suffer drastically from the "Bad Baseline"
evaluation problem where researchers pick a bad baseline to compare
their system against. 

**Diversity Workshop**. I quickly want to mention the [Ada Diversity
  Workshop](https://www.sigops.org/sosp/sosp17/workshop-ada.html),
  which was conducted for the first year this time at SOSP. The
  workshop allowed female researchers and other under-represented
  minorities to hear from leading researchers on how to have a
  successful research career. My student
  [Jayashree](https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~jaya/index.html) got to meet
  her academic grand-advisor, my advisor [Andrea
  Arpaci-Dusseau](http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~dusseau/), at the
  workshop! Kudos to the organizers for this year's workshop, and I
  hope they continue doing this at OSDI and SOSP!

### The Program

We had an excellent program this year under the watch of PC chairs
[Peter Chen](http://web.eecs.umich.edu/~pmchen/) and [Lorenzo
Alvisi](https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~lorenzo/). They accepted 39 papers
(a record number), signifying the increasing number of submissions to
SOSP. The acceptance rate was 16.8%. One thing to note though was that
it was rather tiring sitting through three full days of
presentations. As the number of papers at SOSP or OSDI goes up, I'm
not sure how the community will handle this (I really don't want
parallel tracks).

There were many interesting presentations at the conference. Let me
highlight a few of them.
    
I loved the [My VM is Lighter (and Safer) than your
Container](http://cnp.neclab.eu/projects/lightvm/lightvm.pdf)
presentation by [Costin
Raiciu](https://cs.pub.ro/index.php/people/userprofile/costin_raiciu). Costin
spoke at break-neck pace (it was almost like a rap song!), but the
presentation was still clear and engaging. This is very hard to pull
off! I think the paper reflects the systems spirit of carefully
analyzing where the overhead is coming from, and achieving a seemingly
impossible goal (VMs as fast as containers to start up!) through a
sequence of careful engineering decisions. We covered the LightVM
paper in my [undergrad Virtualization
class](http://www.cs.utexas.edu/~vijay/cs378-f17/index.htm).

I liked the talks from MIT: clear and engaging. I especially liked the
[Scaling a file system to many cores using an operation
log](https://dl.acm.org/authorize?N47149) talk which uses ideas
similar to my old [Optimistic Crash
Consistency](http://research.cs.wisc.edu/adsl/Publications/optfs-sosp13.pdf)
work. The [Algorand](https://dl.acm.org/authorize?N47148) talk, which
introduced a new cryptocurrency that confirms transactions in minutes,
was also intriguing.

I also liked the [Tock](https://dl.acm.org/authorize?N47259)
work. Tock introduces a new embedded operating system written entirely
in Rust. Tock introduces multi-programming for embedded devices, using
a combination of Rust features and new abstractions such as
grants. I'm glad SOSP included at least one instance where somebody
was actually building an operating system :)
    
**Minor Issues**. The audio at the conference was not very
  good. Often, in the back, we wouldn't be able to hear what the
  speakers were saying. When people asked questions, we often didn't
  hear what the questions were either. The slides were projected a bit
  low, so that the folks in the front blocked the bottom part of the
  slides for those in the back. These were minor issues which took
  away from an otherwise excellent and enjoyable conference.

**Focus.** One thing I wondered back at OSDI 16, and again at SOSP 17,
  was whether the conference has gotten too broad. Unlike conferences
  like [FAST](https://www.usenix.org/conference/fast17), there is no
  single theme that connects together all the papers. I suppose
  "systems" is the connecting link, but that is too broad to be
  useful. Going by the number of questions, many talks do not seem to
  excite or engage a large fraction of the audience. I remember at
  OSDI 16, even one of the best paper talks hardly had any questions!
  My (perhaps faulty) memory is that SOSP 13 and OSDI 14 had far more
  engagement (I missed SOSP 15).  I do not know if this is inevitable
  as the systems community expands, but it is something to think
  about.
        
**Arpaci-Dusseau Extended Family at SOSP!** My academic siblings who
  are professors, [Haryadi
  Gunawi](http://people.cs.uchicago.edu/~haryadi/) (UChicago) and
  [Yiying Zhang](https://engineering.purdue.edu/~yiying/) (Purdue),
  were attending the conference along with their students who were
  presenting the [MittOS](https://dl.acm.org/authorize?N47255) and the
  [Lite Kernel RDMA](https://dl.acm.org/authorize?N47253)
  papers. Since my advisor Andrea was also attending the conference,
  it gave us a chance to take a picture of Andrea with her academic
  children and grand-children: Andrea, Yiying, Haryadi, and I with all
  of our students who were attending SOSP :)

<center>    
<img src="/img/adg-sosp.jpg" width="400">
<br><i>The ADG Extended Family!</i><br>
</center>        